Hey guys, in this lesson we're going to talk all about Cookies and Sessions.

Now just a word of warning here during the lesson, if you continue watching, you may start to feel

that you get a little bit hungry.

So don't blame me if I've just completely derailed your diet plan, because in this lesson, we're going

to talk all about cookies and their yummy goodness.

Not really, the type of cookies that we're talking about that relates to web development are more similar

to fortune cookies, because they have a message that's packaged inside, and you can pass these around

and they can be broken to reveal the message.

You've probably come across cookies before, but if you haven't, I just want to show you how it works

in practice.

So let's say we go on to Amazon and we search for the switch, right? The Nintendo Switch.

And we decide to go ahead and add it to basket.

So now when we look inside our basket, you can see we have one item; the switch.

Right?

And then we're going to do something that all e-commerce sites hate,

we're going to go and navigate away and abandon our shopping cart.

Now this to any e-commerce website is a real crime, because the user obviously wanted to buy something,

but then at some point, they got distracted by something else abandoning their cart without checking

out.

So what does Amazon do?

Well, as soon as you added that item to the cart, Amazon has created a cookie and has stored that

cookie on your browser.

So how can we go and view that Cookie well, inside Chrome,

if you go to Settings and you search for cookie.

If you scroll right to the bottom, it shows you that there's something relating to cookies inside Content

Settings.

So if we go over there and we click on Cookies, you can see there's this option to, "See all cookies

and site data."

And now you can see that Amazon has not added just one cookie,

just by doing that very small act of adding a Nintendo Switch to our Amazon basket, Amazon has told

our browser to save all sorts of information about ourselves. And if we click on amazon.co.uk, you

can see there's the session-token, the session-id and these cookies don't necessarily contain any actual

information,

say, "This user wanted to buy a Nintendo Switch," but what they do contain is an ID number, and this

ID will be used to fetch all of those things that you added to your cart during this browsing session

on Amazon.

And this is why, if you decide to go and close down your browser and you open it back up and let's

head back to amazon.co.uk, you can see that my switch is still inside the basket, so they haven't

forgotten this.

So that means the next time I go on to Amazon, that Nintendo Switch is still going to be in my shopping

basket.

However, if we go into those cookies for Amazon,

and we go ahead and delete it...

So let's go back to, "See all cookies and site data,"

we find the one that is directly related to Amazon and we remove all of these.

Now if we go and refresh this website, you can see we've forced it to forget our last browsing session,

and it doesn't know about that Nintendo Switch anymore.

Now on the internet, cookies are used widely to save these browsing sessions, and it goes beyond just

saving your last actions on the website.

When Amazon adds those cookies to my browser, it also means that when I go and visit another website,

say if I go on to Facebook, then it knows who I am and what items I wanted to buy on Amazon, and it

will try to remind me of that thing that I wanted to buy on Amazon.

And it's kind of creepy,

but this is essentially how retargeting ads work.

Once a user comes to your website, initiate some sort of buying behavior, and then they decide to

abandon cart, you save what it is that they wanted, and then on other websites, or when they come

back onto your website, you remind them about that thing that they wanted to buy.

And this is all done through cookies and sessions.

If we review this from a web development point of view, it means that, say, on day one when I go

into Chrome and I type in Amazon.com, my browser will make a GET request to Amazon's server requesting

for their home page.

Amazon Server will then respond to that request and send over the HTML, CSS, and JavaScript files

that are needed for my browser to be able to render the Amazon website.

And then let's say that we decided to add a computer to our cart.

Well, that is equivalent to making a POST request to Amazon server saying that, "I would like to buy

a computer."

Right?

And it's at this moment in time when Amazon servers will create a cookie that contains that data,

"This user wanted to buy a computer." And when it responds to the POST request, that cookie gets sent

along and the browser gets told to save that cookie.

So that means that if I now get distracted and I decide to go on to Facebook or whatever it may be,

but if I come back tomorrow, that cookie is still saved on my browser.

The next time that I make a GET request to Amazon server, that cookie gets sent along with my GET request

to allow the server to be able to identify who I am and see if I had any previous sessions on Amazon.

And it's the equivalent of cracking open that fortune cookie, revealing what were the previous things

that I wanted to buy.

So in this case it was a computer and then they could respond with the HTML, CSS, JavaScript and also

render my cart so that the computer is already added in the cart.

There are lots of different types of cookies, but the types of cookies that we're going to be looking

at, are the ones that are used to establish and maintain a session.

A session is a period of time when a browser interacts with a server.

Usually when you log in to a website, that's when your session starts, and that's when your fortune

cookie gets created.

And inside that fortune cookie, you'll have your user credentials that says, "This user is logged in

and has been successfully authenticated."

So that means as you continue to browse the website, you won't be asked to log in again when you try

to access a page that requires authentication, because they can always check against that active cookie

that you have on your browser, and it maintains your authentication for this browsing session until

the point when you log out, which is when this session ends,

and the cookie that's related to this session gets destroyed.

We're going to be implementing cookies and sessions into our website, and we're going to be doing it

using something called Passport.

Now, if you talk about NodeJS and authentication, it's almost impossible to not mention Passport.

And it's something that's very, very flexible and it allows you to authenticate your users using either

a local strategy like what we're doing right now, which is username and password, or use a whole bunch

of other services such as Google, Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter.

And it makes it a lot easier for you to be able to plug these different ways of authentication into

your website.

Let's get started learning about Passport and learning about how we can implement cookies and sessions.

Again in this lesson, there is an associated download and that's a zipped file that when you unzip it should

be a folder with files called 9.3 Sessions & Cookies.

As always extract it,

open it in VS Code, run "npm install" once you have navigated to the correct location, and you'll notice that

we've added a couple of new packages in the dependencies for this project compared to last time.

The first one is something called "express-session" , which is the package that we're going to use to

enable this kind of session persistence, which allows us to save a cookie on the user's browser

and the next time they try to access our website, we check that cookie and make sure that we can bypass

that whole login process.

Another tool that we're using in order to work with Express Session is called Passport and Passport.js

is a really neat library because it allows us to add lots of different authentication strategies

into one project very easily.

You can see that there are 500 plus strategies, and that includes a lot of the most commonly used ones.

For example, if you wanted to allow people to log in with Twitter, if you wanted people to log in

with Facebook or Google or GitHub or Microsoft or just a whole bunch of different strategies, you can

implement passport and you'll be able to add each one of these strategies very easily, just as if you're

playing Lego.

So we're going to get started by implementing something called "passport-local", because at the moment

the only strategy we have is local login, which means username and password, or in our case it's email

and password.

To use it, we need the passport module as well as passport-local and also express-session.

So don't worry about spelling it wrong, don't worry about typing it wrong,

it's already included in the package.json,

so once you do that "npm install", those modules will get added automatically into your node_modules

folder.

The code in index.js is completely the same as before, but I want to walk you through step by step

how we can implement cookies, sessions and all in the package of using the passport-local strategy.

The first thing we're going to do is we're going to import something called session from our package,

"express-session",

and this is going to allow us to set up a new session to start saving user login sessions.

So we're going to use this as a middleware.

So use app.use(),

and then we tap into the session and we create a new instance and pass in some options.

What are the options we're going to add.

Most important we need a secret.

And this is the secret that's used to sign the session cookie.

So if you remember what we talked about encryption, this is quite important,

you can consider this as the key that's used to keep the session secret.

Because we're bypassing the login process,

we need to make sure that we are doing everything that we can in order to make sure that we are protecting

the user's login information.

You can set this to any string you like.

So for example, I'm just going to call it, "TOPSECRETWORD".

And in this case you can replace that with whatever you like, just as long as you make sure you add

one.

Next we're going to set resave, to false.

And what this option does is whether if we want to force a session to be saved into the store.

The great thing about session, is you pair it with Postgres and you can save the session to your database.

At the moment I'm not going to do that.

So I'm going to set this resave to false because we're going to save it in our app on our server for

now.

If you wanted to persist this, then you can look up how to use Express session with a Postgres store

to store it.

And that means that even if your server was reset or if you updated your server and restarted it, it

would still work for the user because that information would be on the database. For now,

I think this should do just fine.

So the final one I'm going to set is something called, "saveUninitialized".

And again this is to do with the whether or not we want to force a session to be saved to the store.

And I'm going to set this to true so that we actually store the uninitialized sessions into our server

memory.

Now, once we've done all of that, the next thing we're going to do is we're going to use Passport.

So I'm going to import passport from the "passport" module.

And it's really important that your passport module goes after your session initialization.

You should have already created your session before you use the next lines of code.

This is really important. If you get the order wrong in our middleware because we know it gets run

from top to bottom.

If you haven't got a session that you've already set up, and then you try to do the next thing, which

is again. middleware.,

so app.use() and then it's passport.initialize()

and that requires some parentheses because it's a method.

And then it's app.use(passport.session).

This has to happen after we already have a session that's already ongoing,

otherwise it's not going to work.

So just make sure that you've got the right order in your code as well.

So now that we've done all of that, I'm going to show you what's a really cool thing that you can do,

because we're now using Passport and sessions.

At the moment we're deciding whether or not to show the user secrets.ejs, depending on whether

or not they've passed either registration or login,

but in most cases, you would probably want a route, right?

You would want an app.get() that goes to "/secrets", so that the user can hit up that path straight

away in their URL,

but this has its own challenges, because how do we know if they are already logged in?

Well, if we have an active session that's saved in a cookie, then we can straight away show them that

page,

but if we don't, then we shouldn't show it to them.

The way we do this is we can use something that gets saved into the request, which is called isAuthenticated,

and this comes from Passport and it allows us to check, "Is the current user who's logged in in the current

session authenticated already?"

And if that turns out to be true, then we can show them the secrets page.

So we can say if this is true, then in that case we'll res.render the secrets.ejs,

but otherwise, so, else, we're going to res.redirect to the login route.

That way they'll have to log in first before they see this.

If we go ahead and start up our server as it is, you'll see that if I try to go to that route,

"/secrets", it's going to redirect me straight into the login page.

And if you open up the Chrome Developer Tools, so you can either go through Settings, or you can use the

shortcut which I taught you previously, you'll be able to see that under Cookies,

you may or may not see localhost:3000.

All right.

So how can we implement login for the user who we already have stored on our database right here.

We saw that previously.

We can use their email and password to log in,

but now we want to be able to authenticate that session and start it up in Passport.

So the first thing we're going to do is we're going to import and then add a set of curly braces to

import something called {strategy}.

And this strategy comes from passport-local.

So this is actually also known as a local strategy.

Now the next thing we're going to do is we're going to scroll all the way to the bottom just above our

app.listen(),

and we're going to tap into passport, and say passport.use(),

and we're going to use this to register a strategy.

And the strategy is going to be a new Strategy...

So we can create a new object from this class called strategy.

And inside here we're going to call something called verify().

That's a function called verify(),

and it takes three parameters a username, a password,

and a callback, which in the Passport world is always written as cb.

So now we can open up our curly braces and start adding some code into this strategy.

The fact that it's a local strategy means it's trying to validate whether if a user already has the

right password, if their email exists in the database already,

so basically everything that we've already tried to do inside our login route.

So we can actually cut this entire try-catch block and we can paste it straight in here.

There's one thing that we need to remember about Passport.

It can automatically through the use of this verify() function, grab hold of the username and password

from the form that submits the login request.

So if we look in login, you'll see that there is a field called username and a field called password,

and as long as that matches and we have username and password, and also username and password in the

name attribute here, then what it's going to do is it's going to automatically grab it...

And we can in fact confirm this by console logging this.

And instead of us having to use body-parser and grab hold of all of that stuff by using request.body.username,

etcetera, body-parser automates that for us.

The other thing we need to take a look at is because our database queries are asynchronous, so we need

to wait for them to happen before we continue,

we need to change this verify() function to an asynchronous function.

So that's an async function called verify().

And as always how do I know all of this,

of course it's through reading the documentation.

If you go into the documentation section and you go to their tutorials and go to username and password,

then you'll see that there's several sections that we can skip.

We've already got a starting project,

We've already got our Login Prompt,

now this is where we're at at the moment.

We're working through this verify password section.

Now they use a different package to hash the passwords.

We're using Bcrypt and they're using Crypto,

and in fact more projects use Bcrypt in the real world than Crypto,

so don't worry about that.

You are in good company and we're kind of just working through this verify() function at the moment.

One of the important things to realize about how Passport works is it gets triggered whenever we try

to authenticate a user.

So it falls into this verify() function,

and the first thing we try to do as we did before is we're going to see if we have a user with the current

email.

And we're going to change this from email to username as well, so that we actually use the username

that comes from the form.

And if we do, namely the length is greater than 0, then we set them as the current user, including

all of the result that comes back from the database, which remember includes things such as their ID,

their email, their password hash.

Next, we use our Bcrypt to compare their password that was entered in the form versus the password

that was saved on the system,

and if that happens to be the same...

So let's go ahead and change this login password to the password from here.

And if that comparison succeeds then we will end up with a result that is equal to true. Here,

instead of simply res.rendering(secrets.ejs), we're going to try and pass a callback.

So we're going to return from this function which is this verify() function,

and we're going to return by calling the callback,

that's one of these inputs.

And the callback is going to firstly include any errors.

Well, if this result was true then that will be null,

no errors.

And then the next thing we're going to pass over is the details of the actual user.

We can save the details of the user from our database lookup, pass it through the callback,

and that means when we redirect to the next stage, which is to go to the "/secrets", in the

request already we will have the isAuthenticated set to true, and we even have access to something

called a user.

So I'm going to console.log() this a little bit later on,

but I'm just going to write it out so that you can see what it looks like,

req.user() will have the details that we have saved into it from this part where we got the user

from

the database, and then we added the user in to the callback.

What if things go wrong?

Well, if there was an error instead of console logging it, then we should return the callback and

pass the error here.

And also if the password was incorrect, then we should also return a callback.

And in this case it's not really an error because there's nothing wrong with what's happened with Passport

or with authentication,

it's actually a user error, which is not strictly an error.

And here we can set this second value the user to false.

And this basically tells us when we try to get hold of the user or when we check isAuthenticated

to false.

And that means we know that the user is not authenticated.

And then finally we've got this last res.send() which we're going to change into the same format,

return the callback, and we're going to set this as an error,

and we're going to set the error to "User not found".

And we might as well do it in case our database query goes wrong as well.

That's all there is to setting up our local strategy basically takes it out of the app.post() and puts

it into a separate section, which can be reused at any part of our code.

The last thing we need to do is just before the app.listen(), we're going to write something called,

passport.serializeUser, and this takes a function.

So let's add another set of parentheses inside the first set of parentheses.

And we get to serialize a user.

So that means that we can save the data of the user who's logged in to local storage.

And we can use the callback to pass over any of the details of the user.

Now, there is another Passport related method that we need just to make this work, which is called

deserializeUser().

And it's exactly the same code,

it just passes along the user's information

and all that this does is it saves the user's information such as their ID, their email to the local

session, and then when you want to get hold of the user, it deserializes it back into a way that you

can access the user's information through that session.

Coming back to our app.post(), instead of handling everything inside an asynchronous function as we normally

do, grabbing hold of the request, sending back a response, et cetera, we're actually going to ignore

all of that, and we're going to use Passport as middleware.

So that means that straight after the comma, after the route, we're going to use passport.authenticate(),

and this is the method that is going to trigger the strategy down here as long as we tell it to.

So we're going to say use the local strategy in order to authenticate this particular request.

And what this is going to do is we're going to set some options,

first is a successRedirect.

Where do you want to redirect the user

if everything went well and they are successfully authenticated? We redirect them to "/secrets".

Now what about a failure redirect.

Well, if they got the password wrong, if it didn't work for any sort of reason, we're going to redirect

them back into the login page.

If all of that's a bit confusing, let's first just try it out.

So let's hit Save.

Make sure that we've got our server already running.

And let's go ahead and make sure that this actually works.

All right.

So now let's go ahead and test it out.

Let's go to our login page which we have added.

I'm going to put in my user with my email and password.

And you can see as soon as I click login it takes me to the secrets page which meant everything went

well.

And we can actually catch that thing that I told you about the user that got serialized into the session,

and then deserialized when we need to access it by tapping into req.user. We can console.log() it

when we actually head over to the secrets page. Let's go back to our login page.

Click login and you can see that req.user being printed here.

It gives me their ID, their email, their password, and all of these things are stored whenever an

authenticated request is made.

And this also means if I try to go to the secrets route again, if I try to hit refresh on this page,

or if I just go to it, or even if I close down my tab and reopen a new tab, you can see that my session

is now saved.

And if you go into the Chrome Developer Tools, which remember is over here under More Tools, Developer

Tools, you'll be able to go to the Application tab,

and here you can see under the Cookies section that for our URL localhost 3000, we've added a cookie

into here that helps us to persist this session.

This is why this is saved.

Now you might be wondering, well, how long is that session saved?

What if I closed down the browser and then I try to go to this again?

Will that work?

Well, no.

As you can see, I typed it in again and it told me to log in.

That's because that session cookie has now expired.

So how do we set the expiry?

Well, we can go into where we have our app.use() and we have our session,

one of the options is cookie.

And the cookie can have an option called maxAge,

and this specifies a number in milliseconds to use when calculating the expiry.

If we start out with 1000 milliseconds as one second, and then we times it by 60 to get one minute,

and then we times it by 60 to get one hour, and then maybe we times it by 24 to get one day,

then we end up with a one-day length cookie.

So now if I repeat that experiment again, let's go ahead and log in, copy our URL and close down this

browser and then put it back in here.

You can see my cookie is still valid.

It's still working.

So that's just one thing that you can mess around with depending on what your needs are.

The final thing we need to do for our session is what about the registration route?

We've got this strategy for login, which is all very well and good, but right now our register route

still tries to do a res.render.

We can update this very, very easily using another method that we get as a part of using Passport.

What we're going to change here is instead of simply just inserting the user and not caring about the results,

we're going to change this to say, INSERT INTO the user the new email and password,

but we're also going to use that RETURNING SQL command in order to return everything that we get back

from the record that we just inserted.

So that means that we can actually get hold of the new user

through this result of this database query. The user gets inserted and then it comes back in the result

because we're using that returning function.

And then we can simply set the new user to equal the result.rows,

and we're going to tap into the first row.

And now instead of using res.render("/secrets), we're going to use req.login which comes from Passport,

and remember it is this particular login,

so i is lowercase.

This is important.

And inside here we're going to pass the user that we're going to save to the session.

That is going to be the same as the user we created just now.

And then it also allows us to add a callback in the case of what to do once everything is done.

If there are any errors, it'll be captured in here, and we can simply console.log() any errors if it exists,

otherwise, we can do a res.redirect and we can redirect to the secrets route.

And once we've called req.login(),

this automatically authenticates our user, passes this user's information into the session, serializes,

deserializes,

and when we get over here, we'll still be able to log that user right here.

We can check if they're authenticated just the same as when we do our login route.

And I'm going to show you this by creating a new user.

So let's go to the register route and let's create a new user.

So I don't have this email in my database yet I'm going to register her goes straight to the secrets

page,

and you'll see that user being printed right here from this line in the app.get() of the secrets route.

This is a really neat way of being able to get hold of your user data at any route or any part of your

server, and it's really useful when you want to check information for that user.

When you want to persist, user sessions, etc. even though it doesn't add a lot in terms of security,

it's a really important part of all modern websites

when we do authentication, that we actually persist their sessions.

In the next lesson, we're going to talk about something called Environment Variables.

And you can see even when you were creating this session, it tells you that this secret should be stored

in an environment variable so that it doesn't get added to your repository.

And that is what we're going to discuss in the next lesson, how we create environment variables, how

we prevent them from being exposed to other people,

because after all, this is an encryption key and it is very, very top secret.

So for all of that and more, I'll see you there.

